[IMP] l10n: Chile new features (#4317)
odoo/documentation: content/applications/finance/fiscal_localizations/chile.rst

  regional office

.. _chile/electronic-invoice:

Electronic invoice data
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Select your :guilabel:`SII Web Services` environment:

- :guilabel:`SII - Test`: for test databases using test :abbr:`CAFs (Folio
  Authorization Code)` obtained from the :abbr:`SII (Servicio de Impuestos Internos)`. In this mode,
  the direct connection flows can be tested, with the files being sent to the :abbr:`SII (Servicio
  de Impuestos Internos)`.
- :guilabel:`SII - Production`: for production databases.
- :guilabel:`SII - Demo Mode`: files are created and accepted automatically in demo mode and are
  **not** sent to the :abbr:`SII (Servicio de Impuestos Internos)`. For this reason, rejection
  errors or *Accepted with Objections* will not appear in this mode. Every internal validation can
  be tested in demo mode. Avoid selecting this option in a production database.

Then, enter the :guilabel:`Legal Electronic Invoicing Data`:

- :guilabel:`SII Resolution N°`
- :guilabel:`SII Resolution Date`

.. image:: chile/electronic-invoice-data.png
   :alt: Required information for electronic invoice.

.. _chile/dte-email:

DTE incoming email server
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> The :abbr:`DTE (Documentos Tributarios Electrónicos)` :guilabel:`Email Box Electronic Invoicing` can

Author: Yes we are still in the **Accounting ‣ Configuration ‣ Settings ‣ Chilean Localization** here, 
<img width="640" alt="Screenshot 2023-10-26 at 10 32 14 AM" src="https://github.com/odoo/documentation/assets/36018073/e5fe2db5-6b61-4745-a7d7-8bf7458387e9">

@samueljlieber restate where the user is in the **DTE incoming email server** section

> be defined to receive your customers' claim and acceptance emails. Enabeling this option is

Reviewer: Typo
```suggestion
be defined to receive your customers' claim and acceptance emails. Enabling this option is
```

necessary if you want to use *Email Box Electronic Invoicing* as the :abbr:`DTE (Documentos

> Tributarios Electrónicos)` incoming email server. To do so, click :guilabel:`Configure DTE Incoming
> Email`. Then, click :guilabel:`New` to add a server and fill in the following fields:

Reviewer: Just spoke to a CL l10n expert here in SF office. We need this **important** admonition here as we receive a lot of support tickets in relation to this cc: @erla-odoo 
```suggestion
Tributarios Electrónicos)` incoming email server.

.. important::
   In order to receive your SII documents, it's necessary to set up your own email server.
   More information on how to do this can be found in this documentation:
   :doc:`../../general/email_communication/email_servers`

Begin by, clicking :guilabel:`Configure DTE Incoming Email`. Then, click :guilabel:`New` to add a
server and fill in the following fields:
```

Author: @StraubCreative the instructions in this section are for setting up an _Incoming Email Server_, I am not sure if linking to the `email_servers.rst` doc is correct since the instructions in the **DTE incoming email server** section are specific to l10n_CL. 

I agree that an **Important** admonition is required to highlight this step, but the instructions are already within this section, no?

cc: @masi-odoo @elre-odoo

Reviewer 2: You could leave it without the link, I suggested having it because some people do want more information regarding setting up the email servers so having the link would lower the amount of tickets submitted for that.

Author: @erla-odoo I will leave the link then! I wanted to make sure the link was relevant! 🙂 Thanks!

- :guilabel:`Certificate Key`: click :guilabel:`Upload your file` and select the `.pfx` file.
- :guilabel:`Certificate Passkey`: enter the file's passphrase.
- :guilabel:`Subject Serial Number`: depending on the certificate format, the field might not be
  loaded automatically. In that case, enter the certificate's legal representative RUT.
- :guilabel:`Certificate Owner`: select one if you need to restrict the certificate for a specificu
  user. Leave the field empty to share it with all your billing users.

.. image:: chile/new-certificate.png
   :alt: Digital certificate configuration.

Multicurrency
-------------

The official currency rate is provided by `Chilean mindicador.cl <https://mindicador.cl>`_. Navigate
to :menuselection:`Accounting --> Configuration --> Settings --> Currencies: Automatic Currency
Rates` to set an :guilabel:`Interval` for the rate update or to select another :guilabel:`Service`.

Partner information
-------------------

Configuring partner contacts is also required to send :abbr:`SII (Servicio de Impuestos Internos)`
electronic invoices. Open the :menuselection:`Contacts` app to do so and fill in the following

> fields:

Reviewer: be specific 😉 
```suggestion
fields on a new or existing contact record's form.
```

> - Name

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- :guilabel:`Name`
```

invoice documents.

Your company can make several requests for folios and obtain several :abbr:`CAF (Folio Authorization
Code)`s, each one associated with different ranges of folios. The :abbr:`CAF (Folio Authorization
Code)`s are shared within all the journals, this means that you only need one active :abbr:`CAF
(Folio Authorization Code)` per document type and it will be applied on all journals.

Please refer to the `SII documentation <https://palena.sii.cl/dte/mn_timbraje.html>`_ to check the
details on how to acquire the :abbr:`CAF (Folio Authorization Code)` files.

.. important::
   The :abbr:`CAFs (Folio Authorization Code)` required by the :abbr:`SII (Servicio de Impuestos
   Internos)` are different from production to test (certification mode). Make sure you have the
   correct :abbr:`CAF (Folio Authorization Code)` set depending on your environment.

Upload CAF files
----------------

Once the :abbr:`CAF (Folio Authorization Code)` files have been acquired from the :abbr:`SII
(Servicio de Impuestos Internos)` portal, they need to be uploaded in the database by navigating to

> :menuselection:`Accounting --> Chilean SII --> CAFs`. Then, click the :guilabel:`New` button to

Author: I like the way you did it here- formatting subheadings in a menu with a colon. I think both ways are correct!

      :align: center

   .. important::
      There are several internal status in the :abbr:`SII (Servicio de Impuestos Internos)` before
      you get acceptance or rejection. Continuously clicking the button :guilabel:`Verify in SII`
      will log the intermediate statuses in the chatter. These internal statuses take a few seconds
      of processing time. To avoid any issues, it is recommended to **not** continuously click the
      :guilabel:`Verify in SII` button so the flow can work smoothly.

      .. image:: chile/chatter-internal-statuses.png
         :alt: Electronic invoice data statuses.
         :align: center

#. The final response from the :abbr:`SII (Servicio de Impuestos Internos)` can take on one of these
   values:

   - :guilabel:`Accepted`: Indicates the invoice information is correct, our document is now
     fiscally valid and it's automatically sent to the customer.
   - :guilabel:`Accepted with objections`: Indicates the invoice information is correct, but a minor
     issue was identified, nevertheless the document is now fiscally valid and it's automatically
     sent to the customer.

>    - :guilabel:`Rejected`: Indicates the information in the invoice is incorrect and needs to be
>      corrected, the detail of the issue is received in the emails you registered in the :abbr:`SII
>      (Servicio de Impuestos Internos)`, if it is properly configured in Odoo, the details are also
>      retrieved in the chatter once the email server is processed.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
   - :guilabel:`Rejected`: Indicates the invoice information is incorrect and must be corrected.
     Details are sent to emails you registered in the :abbr:`SII (Servicio de Impuestos Internos)`.
     If it is properly configured in Odoo, the details are also retrieved in the chatter once the
     email server is processed.
```

     If the invoice is rejected please follow these steps:

>       - Change the document to :guilabel:`Draft`.
>       - Make the required corrections based on the message received from the :abbr:`SII (Servicio de
>         Impuestos Internos)` in the chatter.
>       - Post the invoice again.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
      #. Change the document to :guilabel:`Draft`.
      #. Make the required corrections based on the message received from the :abbr:`SII (Servicio
         de Impuestos Internos)` in the chatter.
      #. Post the invoice again.

```

used for credit or debit notes, but in some cases can be used on customer invoices as well. In the
case of the credit and debit notes, they are set automatically by Odoo.

.. image:: chile/cross-reference-tab-registration.png
   :alt: Crossed referenced document(s).
   :align: center

.. _chile/electronic-invoice-pdf-report:

Invoice PDF report
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Once the invoice is accepted and validated by the :abbr:`SII (Servicio de Impuestos Internos)` and
the PDF is printed, it includes the fiscal elements that indicate that the document is fiscally
valid:

.. image:: chile/sii-validation-elements.png
   :alt: SII Validation fiscal elements.
   :align: center

.. important::
   If you are hosted in Odoo SH or On-Premise, you should manually install the `pdf417gen
   <https://pypi.org/project/pdf417gen/>`_ library. Use the following command to install it:
   :command:`pip install pdf417gen`.

Commercial validation
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Once the invoice has been sent to the customer:

#. :guilabel:`DTE Partner Status` changes to :guilabel:`Sent`.
#. The customer must send a reception confirmation email.

> #. Subsequently, if all the commercial terms and invoice data are correct, they will send the
>    acceptance confirmation, otherwise they send a claim.

Reviewer 3: Suggestions for brevity. Also, not really sure who "they" are in the original sentence. Might be useful to specify

```suggestion
#. Subsequently, if commercial terms and invoice data are correct, an acceptance confirmation is
   sent; otherwise, a claim is sent.
```

#. The field :guilabel:`DTE Acceptance Status` is updated automatically.

.. image:: chile/partner-dte-status.png
   :alt: Message with the commercial acceptance from the customer.
   :align: center

Processed for claimed invoices
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Once the invoice has been accepted by the :abbr:`SII (Servicio de Impuestos Internos)`, **it can not
be cancelled in Odoo**. In case you get a claim for your customer, the correct way to proceed is
with a credit note to either cancel the invoice or correct it. Please refer to the
:ref:`chile/credit-notes` section for more details.

.. image:: chile/accepted-invoice.png
   :alt: Invoice Commercial status updated to claimed.
   :align: center

Common errors
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

There are multiple reasons behind a rejection from the :abbr:`SII (Servicio de Impuestos Internos)`,
but these are some of the common errors you might have and how to solve them:

- | **Error:** `RECHAZO- DTE Sin Comuna Origen`

>   | **Hint:** Make sure the company address is properly filled including the state and city.

Reviewer 3: out of curiosity, what's this formatting with the | here for, Sam? (:

Author: @Felicious  the `|` character [forces a line break](https://www.sphinx-doc.org/en/master/usage/restructuredtext/basics.html#lists-and-quote-like-blocks). So it can be helpful to use in a list, if you want to break a line in a bullet point :)

- | **Error:** `CARATULA`
  | **Hint:** There are just five reasons why this error could show up and all of them are related
    to the *Caratula* section of the XML:

    - The company's RUT number is incorrect or missing.
    - The certificate owner RUT number is incorrect or missing.
    - The SII's RUT number (this should be correct by default).
    - The resolution date.
    - The resolution number.

.. _chile/credit-notes:

Credit notes
------------

When a cancellation or correction is needed over a validated invoice, a credit note must be
generated. It is important to consider that a :abbr:`CAF (Folio Authorization Code)` file is
required for the credit note, which is identified as :guilabel:`Document Type` :guilabel:`61` in the
:abbr:`SII (Servicio de Impuestos Internos)`. Please refer to the :ref:`CAF section
<chile/caf-documentation>` for more information on the process to load the :abbr:`CAF (Folio
Authorization Code)` on each document type.

.. image:: chile/credit-note-document-type.png
   :alt: Creation of CAF for Credit notes.
   :align: center

Use cases
~~~~~~~~~

Cancel referenced document
**************************

> In case you need to cancel or invalid an invoice, use the button :guilabel:`Add Credit note` and
> select :guilabel:`Full Refund`, in this case the :abbr:`SII (Servicio de Impuestos Internos)`
> reference code is automatically set to :guilabel:`Anula Documento de referencia`.

Reviewer 3: Is this where I'd find an invoice? I don't see the "Full Refund" option but I might be missing some configuration

```suggestion
In case you need to cancel or invalid an invoice, navigate to :menuselection:`Accounting -->
Customers --> Invoices` and select the desired invoice. Then, use the button :guilabel:`Add Credit
Note` and select :guilabel:`Full Refund`, in this case the :abbr:`SII (Servicio de Impuestos
Internos)` reference code is automatically set to :guilabel:`Anula Documento de referencia`.
```
![image](https://github.com/odoo/documentation/assets/23611711/3cd1a985-9bc9-41e3-b225-928828dca962)

.. image:: chile/credit-note-cancel-ref-doc.png
   :alt: Credit note canceling the referenced document.
   :align: center

Correct referenced document
***************************

If a correction in the invoice information is required, for example the *street name*, use the
button :guilabel:`Add Credit Note`, select :guilabel:`Partial Refund` and select the option
:guilabel:`Only Text Correction`. In this case the :guilabel:`SII Reference Code` is automatically
set to :guilabel:`Corrects Referenced Document Text`.

.. image:: chile/credit-note-correct-text.png
   :alt: Credit note correcting referenced document text.
   :align: center

Odoo creates a credit note with the corrected text in an invoice and :guilabel:`Price` `0.00`.

.. image:: chile/text-correction-label.png
   :alt: Credit note with the corrected value on the invoice lines.
   :align: center

.. important::

>    It's important to define the :guilabel:`Default Credit Account` in the sales journal as it is
>    taken for this use case in specific.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
   Make sure to define the :guilabel:`Default Credit Account` in the sales journal specifically for
   this use case.
```

Corrects referenced document amount
***********************************

When a correction on the amounts is required, use the button :guilabel:`Add Credit note` and select
:guilabel:`Partial Refund`. In this case the :guilabel:`SII Reference Code` is automatically set to
:guilabel:`Corrige el monto del Documento de Referencia`.

.. image:: chile/credit-note-correct-amount.png
   :alt: Credit note for partial refund to correct amounts, using the SII reference code 3.
   :align: center

Debit notes
-----------

> As part of the Chilean localization, besides creating credit notes from an existing document you can
> also create debit notes. For this just use the button :guilabel:`Add Debit Note`. The two main use
> cases for debit notes are detailed below.

Reviewer 3: optional wording suggestion for brevity
```suggestion
In Chilean localization, debit notes, in addition to credit notes, can be created using the
:guilabel:`Add Debit Note` button, with two main use cases.
```

.. _chile/use-cases:

Use cases
~~~~~~~~~

Add debt on invoices
********************

> The most common use case for debit notes is to increase the value of an existing invoice, you need
> to select option :guilabel:`3. Corrige el monto del Documento de Referencia` for the
> :guilabel:`Reference Code SII` field.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The primary use case for debit notes is to increase the value of an existing invoice. To do so,
select option :guilabel:`3. Corrige el monto del Documento de Referencia` for the
:guilabel:`Reference Code SII` field.
```

.. image:: chile/debit-note-correct-amount.png
   :alt: Debit note correcting referenced document amount.
   :align: center

In this case Odoo automatically includes the :guilabel:`Source Invoice` in the :guilabel:`Cross
Reference` tab.

.. image:: chile/auto-ref-debit-note.png
   :alt: Automatic reference to invoice in a debit note.
   :align: center

.. tip::
   You can only add debit notes to an invoice already accepted by the SII.

Cancel credit notes
*******************

> In Chile, the debits notes are used to cancel a valid credit note. In this case, just select the
> :guilabel:`Add Debit Note` button and then select the :guilabel:`1: Anula Documentos de referencia`
> option for the :guilabel:`Reference Code SII` field.

Reviewer 3: optional wording suggestion
```suggestion
In Chile, debits notes are used to cancel a valid credit note. TO do this, click the :guilabel:`Add
Debit Note` button and select the :guilabel:`1: Anula Documentos de referencia` option for the
:guilabel:`Reference Code SII` field.
```

.. image:: chile/debit-note-cancel-ref-doc.png
   :alt: Debit note to cancel the referenced document (credit note).
   :align: center

Vendor bills
------------

> As part of the Chilean localization, you can configure your incoming email server as the same you
> have registered in the :abbr:`SII (Servicio de Impuestos Internos)` in order to:

Reviewer 3: Personally, I thought the wording "as the same" sounded off, but I can't articulate why
```suggestion
As part of the Chilean localization, you can configure your incoming email server to match the one
you have registered in the :abbr:`SII (Servicio de Impuestos Internos)` in order to:
```

- Automatically receive the vendor bills :abbr:`DTE (Documentos Tributarios Electrónicos)` and
  create the vendor bill based on this information.
- Automatically send the reception acknowledgement to your vendor.
- Accept or claim the document and send this status to your vendor.

Reception
~~~~~~~~~

As soon as the vendor email with the attached :abbr:`DTE (Documentos Tributarios Electrónicos)` is
received:

#. The vendor bill maps all the information included in the XML.
#. An email is sent to the vendor with the reception acknowledgement.
#. The :guilabel:`DTE Status` is set as :guilabel:`Acuse de Recibido Enviado`.

Acceptation
~~~~~~~~~~~

If all the commercial information is correct on your vendor bill, then you can accept the document
using the :guilabel:`Aceptar Documento` button. Once this is done, the :guilabel:`DTE Acceptation
Status` changes to :guilabel:`Accepted` and an email of acceptance is sent to the vendor.

.. image:: chile/accept-vendor-bill-btn.png
   :alt: Button for accepting vendor bills.
   :align: center

Claim
~~~~~

In case there is a commercial issue or the information is not correct on your vendor bill, you can

> claim the document before validating it, using the :guilabel:`Claim` button, once this is done, the

Reviewer 3: The original sentence was a little long so I'm splitting it in two here (:
```suggestion
claim the document before validating it, using the :guilabel:`Claim` button. Once this is done, the
```

> :guilabel:`DTE Acceptation Status` changes to :guilabel:`Claim` and an email of rejection is sent to
> the vendor.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
:guilabel:`DTE Acceptation Status` changes to :guilabel:`Claim` and a rejection email is sent to the
vendor.
```

happens the first time a delivery guide is created in Odoo. After the first document has been
correctly generated, Odoo takes the next available number in the :abbr:`CAF (Folio Authorization
Code)` file to generate the following delivery guide.

After the delivery guide is created:

- The :abbr:`DTE (Documentos Tributarios Electrónicos)` file (Electronic Tax Document) is
  automatically created and added to the :guilabel:`chatter`.
- The :guilabel:`DTE SII Status` is set as :guilabel:`Pending to be sent`.

.. image:: chile/chatter-delivery-guide.png
   :alt: Chatter notes of Delivery Guide creation.

The :guilabel:`DTE Status` is automatically updated by Odoo with a scheduled action that runs every
day at night. To get a response from the :abbr:`SII (Servicio de Impuestos Internos)` immediately,
press the :guilabel:`Send now to SII` button.

Once the delivery guide is sent, it may then be printed by clicking on the :guilabel:`Print Delivery
Guide` button.

.. image:: chile/print-delivery-guide-btn.png
   :alt: Printing Delivery Guide PDF.
   :align: center

Delivery guide will have fiscal elements that indicate that the document is fiscally valid when

> printed (if hosted in Odoo SH or on Premise remember to manually add the :guilabel:`pdf417gen`

Reviewer: Italicize Odoo products, spelling
```suggestion
printed (if hosted in _Odoo SH_ or _On-premise_ remember to manually add the :guilabel:`pdf417gen`
```

<chile/caf-documentation>` to check the details on how to acquire the :abbr:`CAFs (Folio
Authorization Code)` for electronic receipts.

Electronic receipts are useful when clients do not need an electronic invoice. By default, there is
a partner in the database called :guilabel:`Anonymous Final Consumer` with a generic RUT
`66666666-6` and taxpayer type of :guilabel:`Final Consumer`. This partner can be used for
electronic receipts or a new record may be created for the same purpose.

.. image:: chile/electronic-receipt-customer.png
   :alt: Electronic Receipt module.
   :align: center

Although electronic receipts should be used for final consumers with a generic RUT, it can also be
used for specific partners. After the partners and journals are created and configured, the
electronic receipts are created in the standard way as electronic invoice, but the type of document
:guilabel:`(39) Electronic Receipt` should be selected in the invoice form:

.. image:: chile/document-type-39.png
   :alt: Document type 39 for Electronic Receipts.
   :align: center

Validation and DTE status
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> When all of the electronic receipt information is filled, either manually or automatically from a
> sales order, proceed to validate the receipt. By default, :guilabel:`Electronic Invoice` is selected

Reviewer: grammar
```suggestion
When all of the electronic receipt information is filled, manually (or automatically) proceed to validate the receipt from the sales order. By default, :guilabel:`Electronic Invoice` is selected
```

invoices as the workflow for electronic receipt follows the same process.

Electronic export of goods
--------------------------

To install the :guilabel:`Electronic Exports of Goods` module, go to :menuselection:`Apps` and
search for `Chile (l10n_cl)`. Then click :guilabel:`Install` on the module :guilabel:`Electronic
Exports of Goods for Chile`.

.. note::
   :guilabel:`Chile - Electronic Exports of Goods for Chile` has a dependency with :guilabel:`Chile
   - Facturación Electrónica`.

Once all configurations have been made for :ref:`electronic invoices <chile/electronic-invoice>`
(e.g., uploading a valid company certificate, setting up master data, etc.), electronic exports of
goods need their own :abbr:`CAFs (Folio Authorization Code)`. Please refer to the :ref:`CAF
documentation <chile/caf-documentation>` to check the details on how to acquire the :abbr:`CAFs
(Folio Authorization Code)` for electronic receipts.

Electronic invoices for the export of goods are tax documents that are used not only for the
:abbr:`SII (Servicio de Impuestos Internos)` but are also used with customs and contain the
information required by it.

> Contact configurations

Reviewer: There's no written content here?

  electronic receipts via web service, based on the :abbr:`SII (Servicio de Impuestos Internos)`
  regulations.
- **l10n_cl_edi_stock:** Includes all technical and functional requirements to generate delivery
  guides via web service, based on the :abbr:`SII (Servicio de Impuestos Internos)` regulations.
- **l10n_cl_edi_exports:** Includes all technical and functional requirements to generate electronic
  invoices for exporting goods, based on the :abbr:`SII (Servicio de Impuestos Internos)` and
  customs regulations.

Configuration
=============

Install the Chilean localization modules
----------------------------------------

For this, go to :menuselection:`Apps` and search for `Chile`. Then click :guilabel:`Install` for all
modules.

.. image:: chile/clile-l10n-modules.png
   :align: center
   :alt: Install Chilean localization modules.

.. note::
   When a database is created from scratch and selecting :guilabel:`Chile` as the country, Odoo will
   automatically install the base module: *Chile - Accounting*. The module *l10n_cl_edi_stock* is
   dependent on the *Inventory* application.

Company settings
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> Once the modules are installed, the first step is to set up the company data.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Once the modules are installed, the first step is to set up the company data. This can be done in General Settings of Odoo, in the Companies section.

Identification Type and VAT
***************************

As part of the Chilean localization, the identification types defined by the :abbr:`SII (Servicio de
Impuestos Internos)` are now available on the partner form. This information is essential for most
transactions.

.. image:: chile/identification-type-vat.png
   :align: center
   :alt: Chilean identification types and VAT for partners.

Taxpayer Type
*************

In Chile, the document type associated with customers and vendors transactions is defined based on

> the :guilabel:`Taxpayer Type`. This field should be defined in the partner form, when creating a
> customer is important you make sure this value is set:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
the :guilabel:`Taxpayer Type`. This field should be defined in the partner form, when creating a
customer in the Contacts application, is important you make sure this value is set:
```
Since contact creation is also reviewed in other sections of the Odoo standard documentation I think it should not be a detailed explanation, but added the part referring to the Contacts application

> .. image:: chile/taxpayer-types.png

Reviewer 4: No reason, there must be an error, but the image should be the next one: https://drive.google.com/file/d/1Jui-hZB1rl-YilX6vtjtgnO4267dObCR/view?usp=sharing

- Ventas Santiago.
- Ventas Valparaiso.

For the retail stores it is common to have one journal per :abbr:`POS (Point of Sale)`:

- Cashier 1.
- Cashier 2.

Purchases
*********

The purchase transactions can be managed with a single journal, but sometimes companies use more
than one in order to handle some accounting transactions that are not related to vendor bills but
can easily be registered using this model, for example:

- Tax payments to the government.
- Employees payments.

Configuration
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

When creating sales journals the next information must be filled in:

:guilabel:`Point of sale type`: If the sales journal will be used for electronic documents, the
option :guilabel:`Online` must be selected. Otherwise, if the journal is used for invoices imported
from a previous system or if you are using the :abbr:`SII (Servicio de Impuestos Internos)` portal
*Facturación MiPyme* you can use the option :guilabel:`Manual`.

:guilabel:`Use Documents`: This field is used to define if the journal will use document types. It
is only applicable to purchase and sales journals that can be related to the different sets of

> document types available in Chile. By default, all the sales journals created will use documents.

Reviewer 4: I cannot suggest directly from the lines :( will comment instead.

Configuration
-------------

To create a Sales Journal please refer to Accounting ‣ Configuration ‣ Journals.

When creating sales journals the next information must be filled in:

    process <https://www.sii.cl/factura_electronica/factura_mercado/proceso_certificacion.htm>`_ in
    the :abbr:`SII (Servicio de Impuestos Internos)` - Sistema de Facturación de Mercado. If this is
    the case, please contact your Account Manager or Customer Support as this certification is not
    part of the Odoo services, but we can give you some alternatives. If you already passed the
    certification process, this error appears when a user different from the owner of the
    certificate is trying to send :abbr:`DTE (Documentos Tributarios Electrónicos)` files to the
    :abbr:`SII (Servicio de Impuestos Internos)`.
- | **Error:** `CARATULA`
  | *Hint:* There are just five reasons why this error could show up and all of them are related to
    the *Caratula* section of the XML:

    - The company's RUT number is incorrect or missing.
    - The certificate owner RUT number is incorrect or missing.
    - The SII's RUT number (this should be correct by default).
    - The resolution date.
    - The resolution number.

.. _chile/credit-notes:

Credit notes
------------

When a cancellation or correction is needed over a validated invoice, a credit note must be

> generated. It is important to consider that a CAF file is required for the credit note, which is
> identified as :guilabel:`Document Type` :guilabel:`61` in the :abbr:`SII (Servicio de Impuestos
> Internos)`.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
generated. It is important to consider that a CAF file is required for the credit note, which is
identified as :guilabel:`Document Type` :guilabel:`61` in the :abbr:`SII (Servicio de Impuestos
Internos)`. Please refer to :doc:`Chile/Configuration/CAF` for more information.
```

Referencing section with this information

   Delivery Guide` module is installed.

.. image:: chile/electronic-receipt-module.png
   :align: center
   :alt: Install Electronic Receipt module.

Once all configurations have been made for electronic invoices (e.g., uploading a valid company
certificate, setting up master data, etc.), electronic receipts need their own :abbr:`CAFs (Folio
Authorization Code)`. Please refer to the :ref:`CAF documentation <chile/caf-documentation>` to
check the details on how to acquire the :abbr:`CAFs (Folio Authorization Code)` for electronic
receipts.

Electronic receipts are useful when clients do not need an electronic invoice. By default, there is
a partner in the database called :guilabel:`Anonymous Final Consumer` with a generic RUT
`66666666-6` and taxpayer type of :guilabel:`Final Consumer`. This partner can be used for
electronic receipts or a new record may be created for the same purpose.

.. image:: chile/electronic-receipt-customer.png
   :align: center
   :alt: Electronic Receipt module.

Although electronic receipts should be used for final consumers with a generic RUT, it can also be
used for specific partners. After the partners and journals are created and configured, the

> electronic receipts are created in the standard way as electronic invoice, but the type of document
> :guilabel:`(39) Electronic Receipt` should be selected:

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
electronic receipts are created in the standard way as electronic invoice, but the type of document
:guilabel:`(39) Electronic Receipt` should be selected:
```
Should be explained where to find this

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
electronic receipts are created in the standard way as electronic invoice, but the type of document
:guilabel:`(39) Electronic Receipt` should be selected in the invoice form:
```

selecting in the :guilabel:`Report` field the option :guilabel:`Chilean Fiscal Balance (8 Columns)
(CL)`.

.. image:: chile/locate-fiscal-balance-report.png
   :align: center
   :alt: Location of the Reporte Balance Tributario de 8 Columnas.

.. image:: chile/8-col-fiscal-balance-report.png
   :align: center
   :alt: Chilean Fiscal Balance (8 Columns).

Propuesta F29
-------------

The form *F29* is a new system that the :abbr:`SII (Servicio de Impuestos Internos)` enabled to
taxpayers, and that replaces the *Purchase and Sales Books*. This report is integrated by Purchase
Register (CR) and the Sales Register (RV). Its purpose is to support the transactions related to
VAT, improving its control and declaration.

This record is supplied by the electronic tax documents (DTE's) that have been received by the
:abbr:`SII (Servicio de Impuestos Internos)`.

You can find this report in :menuselection:`Accounting --> Reporting --> Tax Reports` and selecting
the :guilabel:`Report` option :guilabel:`Propuesta F29 (CL)`.

.. image:: chile/locate-propuesta-f28-report.png
   :align: center
   :alt: Location of the Propuesta F29 (CL) Report.

> It is possible to set the :guilabel:`PPM` (provisional monthly payments rate) and the

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
It is possible to set the :abbr:`PPM (Provisional Monthly Payments rate) and the
```

:guilabel:`Proportional Factor` for the fiscal year in the :menuselection:`Accounting -->
Configuration --> Settings` settings.

.. image:: chile/f29-report.png
   :align: center
   :alt: Default PPM and Proportional Factor for the Propuesta F29 Report.

Or manually in the reports by clicking on the :guilabel:`✏️ (pencil)` icon.

.. image:: chile/full-f29-report.png
   :align: center
   :alt: Manual PPM and Proportional Factor for the Propuesta F29 Report.

.. image:: chile/manual-proportional-f29-report.png
   :align: center
   :alt: Manual Proportional Factor for the Propuesta F29 Report.

.. image:: chile/manual-ppm-f29-report.png
   :align: center
   :alt: Manual PPM for the Propuesta F29 Report.

Demo mode
=========

For a quick demonstration of the different :abbr:`DTE (Documentos Tributarios Electrónicos)`
workflows, the Chilean localization can be tested in the demo mode provided in test databases or in
`runbot.odoo.com <https://runbot.odoo.com/>`_.

.. important::
   Do not use demo mode in a production environment.

To activate demo mode in runbot you must:

> - Access `runbot.odoo.com <https://runbot.odoo.com/>`_
> - Install the Chilean Localization modules

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
- Access `runbot.odoo.com <https://runbot.odoo.com/>`_.
- Install the Chilean Localization modules.
```
